Reduce use of enclave (#3)
mbrandenburger/fabric-rfcs: text/0000-fabric-private-chaincode.md

 
Chaincode Library (also known as the FPC Shim): This is a shim interface exposed to an FPC Chaincode.  The Chaincode Library contains two parts, one residing inside the enclave and another one outside the enclave. The shim interface exposed to the FPC chaincode is written primarily in C++, whereas the counterpart is written in Go and mainly responsible for communication between the Peer and the FPC chaincode. The Chaincode Library enables an FPC Chaincode to talk to the Peer, in particular to invoke the chaincode and provide "normal" shim operations such as getState and putState. The FPC SDK provides the chaincode library to enable FPC chaincode developers to easily link to this library when compiling their FPC Chaincode and building a deployment artifact. It implements the interface from the Peer to the FPC Chaincode, encrypts and decrypts state and arguments, and implements Attestation.
 

> Ledger Enclave: The Ledger Enclave is a crucial component to protect the execution of a FPC chaincode. In particular, it is responsible to ensure that a FPC chaincode processes committed world state data, i.e. only state data that comes from valid and committed transactions. The Ledger Enclave is also called the TLCC, Trusted Ledger Enclave or the Validation Enclave. The Ledger Enclave is a separate enclave which locally stores integrity metadata for validating information on the blockchain ledger. Like the Peer, it performs standard validation logic when a new block arrives, but it also creates and stores a cryptographic hash of each new key-value pair of the blockchain state. This makes it possible to verify that the data coming from the Peer is correct -- remember that in the FPC setting we do not necessarily trust a (single) peer. The Chaincode Enclave uses the Ledger Enclave as its tamperproof source of information on the blockchain world state. The Ledger Enclave and a Chaincode Enclave interact by through a secure channel that is initially established when the Chaincode Enclave is deployed. There is one Ledger Enclave per Channel on any given Peer. When a peer receives a new block from the ordering service, it forwards it to the Ledger Enclave. The Ledger Enclave is part of the FPC runtime.

Author: ```suggestion
Ledger Enclave: The Ledger Enclave is a crucial component to protect the execution of a FPC chaincode. In particular, it is responsible to ensure that a FPC chaincode processes committed world state data, i.e. only state data that comes from valid and committed transactions. The Ledger Enclave is also called the TLCC, Trusted Ledger Enclave. The Ledger Enclave is a separate enclave which locally stores integrity metadata for validating information on the blockchain ledger. Like the Peer, it performs standard validation logic when a new block arrives, but it also creates and stores a cryptographic hash of each new key-value pair of the blockchain state. This makes it possible to verify that the data coming from the Peer is correct -- remember that in the FPC setting we do not necessarily trust a (single) peer. The Chaincode Enclave uses the Ledger Enclave as its tamperproof source of information on the blockchain world state. The Ledger Enclave and a Chaincode Enclave interact by through a secure channel that is initially established when the Chaincode Enclave is deployed. There is one Ledger Enclave per Channel on any given Peer. When a peer receives a new block from the ordering service, it forwards it to the Ledger Enclave. The Ledger Enclave is part of the FPC runtime.
```

 
Writing chaincode for FPC should come natural to developers familiar with Fabric as the programming model (e.g., chaincode lifecycle, chaincode invocations and state) is the same as for normal Fabric chaincode.  The main differences are a (for now at least) different programming language (C++) and a shim API which, on the one hand, is somewhat simplified but, on the other hand, also contains FPC-specific extensions such as allowing for private as well as public ledger state as well as a secure (yet “replicable”) random-number generator.  In particular, a developer can write chaincode largely without having to be aware that the code executes within a Trusted Execution Environment (TEE), often referred to as an Enclave. However, to understand the architecture and security underpinning it we introduce in the following several new concepts and terms. Except where noted otherwise, all elements of the architecture described below reside on a Fabric Peer.
 
 
Terminology:

> * Attestation: An important cryptographic feature of Trusted Execution Environments by which the hardware can reliably state exactly what software it is running. This statement is signed by the hardware so that anyone reading it can verify that the statement came from an actual valid and up-to-date TEE. The Attestation can cover both the software portion of the TEE itself as well as any program to be run in it. This attestation takes the form of a "quote" containing (among other things) a measurement of the code and data in the TEE and its software version number, which is signed by the TEE and can be verified by anyone using well known Public Key Infrastructure technology. 
>  
> * Trusted Execution Environment (TEE): The isolated secure environment in which programs run in encrypted memory, unreadable even by privileged users or system processes. FPC chaincodes run in TEEs. 
>  

Author: TEEs should appear before Attestation
```suggestion
* Trusted Execution Environment (TEE): The isolated secure environment in which programs run in encrypted memory, unreadable even by privileged users or system processes. FPC chaincodes run in TEEs. 

* Attestation: An important cryptographic feature of Trusted Execution Environments by which the hardware can reliably state exactly what software it is running. This statement is signed by the hardware so that anyone reading it can verify that the statement came from an actual valid and up-to-date TEE. The Attestation can cover both the software portion of the TEE itself as well as any program to be run in it. This attestation takes the form of a "quote" containing (among other things) a measurement of the code and data in the TEE and its software version number, which is signed by the TEE and can be verified by anyone using well known Public Key Infrastructure technology. 

```

 
# Prior art
[prior-art]: #prior-art

The initial architecture of FPC is based on the work in the paper:
   
  * Marcus Brandenburger, Christian Cachin, Rüdiger Kapitza, Alessandro
  Sorniotti: Blockchain and Trusted Computing: Problems, Pitfalls, and a
  Solution for Hyperledger Fabric. https://arxiv.org/abs/1805.08541

From a Hyperledger Perspective, FPC is closely related to Private Data Objects (PDO) (https://github.com/hyperledger-labs/private-data-objects) and Avalon (https://github.com/hyperledger/avalon).
FPC is for Fabric what is PDO for Sawtooth: TEE-based smart contracts which extend the respective ledger technology with strong confidentiality in addition to the pre-existing strong integrity. Note that the PDO team is also involved in the design and development of FPC.
Avalon on the other hand focuses on efficient off-chain confidential and (initially) state-less computation, e.g., it does not give any guarantee of rollback-resilient encrypted state or alike. 

> Moreover, Corda (https://docs.corda.net/design/sgx-integration/design.html) proposes the use of Intel SGX to protect privacy and intgrity of smart-contracts. There 

Author: ```suggestion
Moreover, Corda (https://docs.corda.net/design/sgx-integration/design.html) proposes the use of Intel SGX to protect privacy and integrity of smart-contracts. In contrast to FPC, Corda uses Intel SGX to secure transaction validation only whereas our approach executes each FPC chaincode in an enclave.
```

* Trusted Execution Environment (TEE): The isolated secure environment in which programs run in encrypted memory, unreadable even by privileged users or system processes. FPC chaincodes run in TEEs.

> * Enclave: The Intel SGX-specific name for a Trusted Execution Environment (TEE). In the initial release of FPC, the TEE and Enclave terms can be used interchangeably, as the Intel SGX Enclave is the first TEE supported because to date, it is the only TEE with mature support for remote attestation as required by the FPC integrity architecture.

Reviewer: Given that seem to eradicate enclave everywhere, having an "enclave" entry in terminology seems a bit surprising.  That said, (a) we are certainly not going to eradicate the term enclave in the code, at least for now, and (b) we certainly should mention that in practice the TEE under consideration is SGX and the term for a TEE (instance) in SGX is called enclave.  

Proposal:
```suggestion
* Enclave:  The TEE technology used for the initial release of FPC will be Intel SGX.  In SGX terminology a TEE is called an _enclave_.  In our implementation, the TEE and Enclave terms should be considered identical.  Intel SGX is the first TEE technology supported as, to date, it is the only TEE with mature support for remote attestation as required by the FPC integrity architecture.  However, our architecture is generic enough to also allow other implementations based on SMD SEV-SNP or ARM TrustZone.
```
(Slightly revised after telco)

> * Enclave: The Intel SGX-specific name for a Trusted Execution Environment (TEE). In the initial release of FPC, the TEE and Enclave terms can be used interchangeably, as the Intel SGX Enclave is the first TEE supported because to date, it is the only TEE with mature support for remote attestation as required by the FPC integrity architecture.

Reviewer: Revised after discussion on call
```suggestion
* Enclave:   The TEE technology used for the initial release of FPC will be Intel SGX.  In SGX terminology a TEE is called _enclave_.  In our implementation, the TEE and Enclave terms should be considered identical.  Intel SGX is the first TEE technology supported as, to date, it is the only TEE with mature support for remote attestation as required by the FPC integrity architecture.  However, our architecture is generic enough to also allow other implementations based on SMD SEV-SNP or ARM TrustZone.
```

* Attestation: An important cryptographic feature of Trusted Execution Environments by which the hardware can reliably state exactly what software it is running. This statement is signed by the hardware so that anyone reading it can verify that the statement came from an actual valid and up-to-date TEE. The Attestation can cover both the software portion of the TEE itself as well as any program to be run in it. This attestation takes the form of a "quote" containing (among other things) a measurement of the code and data in the TEE and its software version number, which is signed by the TEE and can be verified by anyone using well known Public Key Infrastructure technology.

> Note on Terminology: The current feature naming scheme includes several elements that are Intel SGX-specific; for example, the term "Enclave" as a specific type of Trusted Execution Environment. We intend to revise the naming to reflect that we intend to support other TEEs such as AMD SEV-SNP, etc. The project team currently participates in the new Confidential Computing Consortium which aims to promote standards for deployment of workloads across TEEs, and we intend to align with their terminology.

Reviewer: Is this section really needed as we seem to have now eradicated the term enclave?   It not, we might though also mention what i mentioned in slack ``Also note that enclave is now not so SGX specific anymore and is used now in contexts such as RISC-V (Keystone), various proposals for TrustZone (though not officially via ARM afaik)  and  even by AWS (for soemthing which imho though is a bit a strech to call an enclave/TEE`` ..

Reviewer: BTW: with my suggested update for the terminology section we definitely should drop this section ...

Reviewer: From bruno related to above ``I would that even Apple uses the term Secure Enclave to identify a hardware feature on its own processors.
To some extent, also IBM Data Shield uses the word in a generic manner.``

Chaincode Library (also known as the FPC Shim): This is a shim interface exposed to an FPC Chaincode.  The Chaincode Library contains two parts, one residing inside the TEE and another one outside the TEE. The shim interface exposed to the FPC chaincode is written primarily in C++, whereas the counterpart is written in Go and mainly responsible for communication between the Peer and the FPC chaincode. The Chaincode Library enables an FPC Chaincode to talk to the Peer, in particular to invoke the chaincode and provide "normal" shim operations such as `getState` and `putState`. The FPC SDK provides the chaincode library to enable FPC chaincode developers to easily link to this library when compiling their FPC Chaincode and building a deployment artifact. It implements the interface from the Peer to the FPC Chaincode, encrypts and decrypts state and arguments, and implements Attestation.

> Ledger TEE: The Ledger TEE is a crucial component to protect the execution of a FPC chaincode. In particular, it is responsible to ensure that a FPC chaincode processes committed world state data, i.e. only state data that comes from valid and committed transactions. The Ledger TEE is also called the _TLCC_, Ledger Enclave, Trusted Ledger TEE or the Validation TEE. The Ledger TEE is a separate TEE which locally stores integrity metadata for validating information on the blockchain ledger. Like the Peer, it performs standard validation logic when a new block arrives, but it also creates and stores a cryptographic hash of each new key-value pair of the blockchain state. This makes it possible to verify that the data coming from the Peer is correct -- remember that in the FPC setting we do not necessarily trust a (single) peer. The Chaincode TEE uses the Ledger TEE as its tamperproof source of information on the blockchain world state. The Ledger TEE and a Chaincode TEE interact by through a secure channel that is initially established when the Chaincode TEE is deployed. There is one Ledger TEE per Channel on any given Peer. When a peer receives a new block from the ordering service, it forwards it to the Ledger TEE. The Ledger TEE is part of the FPC runtime.

Reviewer: Do we use anywhere "Validation TEE"?  I've never heard that term before seeing it here. Does seem a bit misleading term, so i would rather eradicate it if easily possible.
